---
layout: post
title: "Vi and Vim"
date: 2025-07-14 10:00:00 +0700
categories: [Controls]
---

## Vi

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You can use vi to edit any text file. vi copies the file to be edited into a buffer, displays the buffer, and
lets you add, delete, and change text. When you save your edtis, vi copies the edited buffer back into a file,
replacing the old file of the same name.
</div>

### Opening a file

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Type vi [filename] to open an existing or a new file. Notice the tildes at the left side, which indicates
empty lines and the name and status of the file on the last line (called the prompt line or the status line).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
When you open a file, you start out in the command mode, one of the two modes in which vi operates (the
other being the insert mode). In the command mode every keystroke represents a command, rather than a text
that you try to type. To switch to the insert mode, you use i , I , a , A , and a few other commands. To get back to the command mode, you use the ESC key
</div>

### Basic editing

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
After you entered the editing mode, you can move by using arrow keys, delete pre-existing text with the
delete key, and type your new text as in any other editor (but note that you can't use the mouse in vi (but
see below)). To switch back to the command mode, use the ESC key
</div>

#### To save and quit a file

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Use ZZ command to save edits and quit (note that ZZ is capitalized; vi commands are case sensitive).
However, it is very common in vi to use commands from another editor, called ex (in fact, vi is the visual
mode for that editor!). To save and quit a file using the ex command, you type :wq or :x . You type
:q! to exit the editor without saving the file.
</div>

### Intermediate vi

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
There are many additional vi command, which will make your editing more efficient. Here are some that I found
useful:
</div>

#### Simple edits

i to insert text before the cursor ( I at the beginning of the line)

a to add text after the cursor ( A at the end of the line)

d to delete

- dw to delete a word
- dd deletes a line
- dl or x deletes one character
- D deletes from the cursor position to the end of the line
r will replace a single character (without switching to the editing mode)
~ will replace the case of the letter

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You can also use cw , cc , C to change a word, line, or the rest of the line and s to substitute
character at cursor ( S will substitute a line).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
For most of these commands, you can add an integer in front to execute them multiple times. E.g., 2dd will
delete two lines, 2cb will change back two words, and 20i hi, there! + ESC will insert that phrase
20 times.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Finally, . will repeat the previous command and u will undo the last change.
</div>

#### Complex movements

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
There are vi commands to scroll forward and backward through the file by full and half screens: ^F ,
^D , ^B , and U , respectively, where ^ stands for the CTRL key
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
On the screen itself, you can move to the top line, middle line, and last line with H , M , and L
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Use 0 / ^ and $ to move to the beginning and end of a line.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Use #G to go to a specific (#) line of your file. G without a line number moves the cursor to the last line of
the file. Typing two backquotes returns you to your original position. BTW, to see numbers in vi type
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
:set nu or :set number ( :set nu! or :set nonumber to remove them).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Obviously, there are commands for "simple movements" as well: h , j , k , and l move your cursor left,
down, up, and right, respectively, while e and b move it to the beginning/end of a word. + and - will
move you to the first character of the next and prevous line, respectively
</div>

#### Movement by Searches

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
A quick way to move around in a large file is by searching for a pattern of characters using the / (slash)
command. When you enter a slash, it appears on the bottom line of the screen; you then type in the pattern
that you want to find: /pattern and press ENTER . You can use the regular expressions in your search
pattern.
</div>

- To search backward, type ?pattern.
- To repeat the search forward/backward, type n / N , respectively

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You can also search for a specific character in a line, by using fx and Fx commands ( x can be any
character). ; and , will repeat the search.
</div>

#### Cutting, copying, and pasting.

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
To cut any text from a file, you delete it (all versions of the d command, like dd and dw will work). The
deleted text is temporarily saved in a special buffer. To paste it back, use the p (put) command. The
lowercase p puts the text after the cursor position. The uppercase P puts the text before the cursor.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
There are nine unnamed buffers, where your deletions are saved. You access them with " . The last delete is
saved in buffer 1, the second-to-last in buffer 2, and so on. To recover your second-to-last deletion, type:
"2p .
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
To copy some text, use the y (for yank) command. The yank command can be combined with any movement
command ( yw , y$ , y^ ). Both yy and Y yank the whole line. After yanking some text, you can
paste (put) it with p or P .
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
In addition, to unnamed buferrs, there are 26 named buffers (a-z) where you can save deleted or yanked text.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
"z5dd will delete five lines into buffer z
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
"z5yy will copy five lines into buffer z
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
If you specify a buffer name with a capital letter, your yanked or deleted text will be appended to the current
contents of that buffer.
</div>

#### Joining Two Lines with J

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Use J to join the current line with the following line.
</div>

#### Repeating or Undoing Your Last Command

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
. (a period) will repeat the previous command u will undo the previous command U undoes all edits on
a single line, as long as the cursor remains on that line.
</div>

### Advanced vi

#### Ex editor

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You have seen some of the ex commands already ( :x , :wq , etc.). In fact, every time we type a colon in vi
we invoke an ex command. Technically, ex is a line editor and vi is its visual mode (also known as a screen
editor). You can use ex by itself in unix, but it can be tricky. The thing to remember is that ex deals with lines,
so its basic commands d , m , co will delete, move, and copy a line. The power of ex comes from its
ability to deal with multiple lines at the same time.
</div>

#### Three ways to access lines in ex:

- With explicit line numbers
- With symbols that help you specify line numbers relative to your current position in the file
- With search patterns as addresses that identify the lines to be affected

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
The first way is rather selfexplanatory: :3,18d will delete lines 3 through 18 (remember, that you can see
line numbers with :set nu or :set number ).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You can also use symbols for line addresses. A dot . stands for the current line; and $ stands for the last
line of the file. % stands for every line in the file. For example: :.,$d deletes from current line to the end
of file and :%d deletes all lines in the file.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Finally, ex can address lines by using search patterns. For example: :/pattern/d delete the next line
containing pattern. :/pattern/+d deletes the line below the next line containing pattern, while
:/pattern1/,/pattern2/d deletes from the first line containing pattern1 through the first line containing
pattern2
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Finally, all three ways to access lines can be combined in the same command.
</div>

#### Global replacements

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Global replacements use two ex commands: :g (global) and :s (substitute).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
The substitute command :s/old/new/ changes the first occurrence of the pattern old to new on the
current line. If you add g after the pattern: :s/old/new/g it will change every occurrence of old to new
on the current line.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
By prefixing the :s command with addresses, you can extend its range to more than one line:
:50,100s/old/new/g or (my favorite) :%s/old/new/g .
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
To confirm each replacement before it is made, add the c option (for confirm) at the end of the substitute
command: :1,30s/his/the/gc . Alternatively, one can use n (repeat last search) and dot . (repeat
last command).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You can also make replacements only on lines that match a specific pattern by combining the global command
g and the substitute s command :g/pattern/s/old/new/g (you can skip old if it is the same as
pattern).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
When making replacements, you can search not just for fixed strings of characters, but also for regular
expressions (using . , * , [] , etc).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
\( \) Saves the pattern enclosed between ( and ) into a “hold buffer.” Up to nine patterns can be saved in this way on a single line and used in replacement string by the sequences \1 to \9 .
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
\< \> match characters at the beginning (<) or at the end (>) of a word
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
In addition to the regular characters and regular expressions, vi can use POSIX Bracket Expressions in
searches. Examples include alphanumeric characters [:alnum:] , collating symbols [.sch.] , and
equivalence classes [=e=] matching e, è, or é in a French locale. Note that these expressions should
themselves be used inside the square brackets (e.g., [[:alpha:]] ).
</div>

### Working with multiple files

#### Copying a file into another file

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
To read the contents of another into a file you are editing, use the :read filename or :r filename
command.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
If you want to specify a line other than the one the cursor’s on, simply type the line number (or other line
address) you want before r (or read ). You can also use all other ways to access lines in ex.
</div>

#### Editing multiple files

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You can edit multiple files in vi(m) by providing several filenames as vi arguments:
vi file1 file2 file3 or vi file* . You can also load another file at any time with the ex command
:e . But note, that to edit another file within vi, you first need to save your current file ( :w ), then give the
command: :e filename . After you have finished editing the first file, the ex command :w writes (saves)
file1 and :n calls in the next file (file2). The :args command (abbreviated :ar ) lists all the files you
are editing, with the current file enclosed in brackets. You can also use vi Ctrl^ command to switch to the
file you edited previously.
</div>

#### Opening files in different tabs or windows(splits)

- Use vi -p file1 file2 file3 command to open several files in different tabs;
- Use vi -o file1 file2 file3 to open files in horizontal splits;
- Use vi -O file1 file2 file3 to open files in vertical splits.

#### Searching and replacing in multiple files

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Often search and replace is needed in multiple files. This tip uses the procedures from run a command in
multiple buffers to show how a substitute may be executed multiple times using :argdo (all files in argument
list), or :bufdo (all buffers), or :tabdo (all tabs), :windo (all windows in the current tab), or :cdo (all files listed in
the quickfix list).
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
The following performs a search and replace in all buffers (all those listed with the :ls command):
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
:bufdo %s/pattern/replace/ge | update
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
These are actually two commands under bufdo : the first is by now familiar %s search and replace and
the second is update , which writes a file only if changes were made. The e option in th %s command tells
it not to print an error if the pattern is not found and | is a separator between commands.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
One alternative is to set the autowriteall option so changed buffers are automatically saved when
required:
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
:set autowriteall :bufdo %s/pattern/replace/ge
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Another alternative is to set the 'hidden' option so buffers do not need to be saved, then use :wa to save all
changes (only changed buffers are written):
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
:set hidden :bufdo %s/pattern/replace/ge :wa
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
If you don't wish to save the results of your replacement, but want to review each changed buffer first, you can
force the bufdo to continue without saving files with bufdo!:
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
:bufdo! %s/pattern/replace/ge
</div>

## VIM (Vi IMproved)

### Syntax extensions

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Vim lets you control indentation and syntax-based color coding of your text.
</div>

### Programmer assistance

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Vim offers many features normally found in Integrated Development Environments (IDEs).
</div>

### Graphical user interface (GUI)

### Scripting and plug-ins

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
You can write your own Vim extensions or download plug-ins from the Internet.
</div>

### Initialization

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Vim, like vi, uses configuration files to define sessions at startup time, but Vim has a vastly expanded
repertoire of definable behaviors.
</div>

### Session context

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Vim keeps session information in a file, .viminfo. Not only does Vim remember edits in your last session
for a file, it remembers basic things between files. This is handy for editing activities such as grabbing a
sequence of lines in one file (with y [yank], or d [delete]) and “putting” them in another.
</div>

### Postprocessing

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
In addition to performing presession functions, Vim lets you define what to do after you’ve edited a file.
You can write cleanup routines to delete temporary files accumulated from compiles, or do real-time edits
to the file before it’s written back to storage. You have complete control to customize any postedit activities
</div>

### Transparent editing

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Vim detects and automatically unbundles archived or compressed files. For example, you can directly edit
a zipped file such as myfile.tar.gz. You can even edit directories. Vim lets you navigate a directory and
select files to edit using familiar Vim navigation commands.
</div>

### Meta-information

<div style="text-align: justify; text-indent: 2em;">
Vim offers four handy read-only registers from which the user may extract metainformation for “puts”: the current filename (%), the alternate filename (#), the last command-line
command executed (:), and the last inserted text (., a period).
</div>